---
Pr-id: MoneyLab
P-id: INC Reader
A-id: 10
Type: article
Book-type: anthology
Anthology item: article
Item-id: unique no.
Article-title: title of the article
Article-status: accepted
Author: name(s) of author(s)
Author-email:   corresponding address
Author-bio:  about the author
Abstract:   short description of the article (100 words)
Keywords:   50 keywords for search and indexing
Rights: CC BY-NC 4.0
...


# 7. The Ends of Videoblogging

> That’s what’s cool about video on a blog. Francis Ford Coppola, his
> quote that one day the next Hollywood masterpiece would be made by a
> 10 year old girl with her dad’s video camera, right? I think we all
> know \[laughs\] that she’s a videoblogger.[^08chapter7_1]

Understanding the close entanglement of culture and technology in the
area of digital media production in the early 2000s – most notably in
the self-definition and development of a community based around video
objects and technologies – has been crucial in the development of this
book. Through an ethnographically-informed approach to cultural history,
which maintains an interest in materials as well as discourses, the book
has explored the practices and technologies of videoblogging, a new form
of cultural-technical hybrid that emerged in our increasingly digital
age. The book traced the discourses and technological infrastructures
that were developed simultaneously within and around the community of
videobloggers that created the important pre-conditions for the video
artifacts they produced and their associated practices.

This research has focussed on the ends of the videoblog as described,
practiced and lived by the videoblogger cohort who made up my sample.
Whilst individual interviewees may have personal ends and goals for
their own videoblog, there are also the collective ends of the videoblog
community, which should not be ignored. The ends have included notions
of sharing, of collectivity, and of a lived community mediated through a
new, innovative and mediated internet experience. Sharing their ideas
freely, their thoughts, their practices, experiences and hence their
culture, they created something extraordinary for too short a period of
time. But we are in danger of forgetting these achievements altogether,
in a situation whereby their archives are incomplete if not absent.

The fragility of digital artifacts, and the status of the videoblog as a
historically located object, has had a number of implications for this
book, both methodological and epistemological. It became apparent,
particularly as the book evolved from a contemporary critique to an
historical project, that as digital material objects, videoblogs are
subject to the same conditions of temporality as other non-digital
objects – over time, if not archived, catalogued and cared for, they can
become difficult to locate and impossible to play-back and watch. As
explored above, the identity of the videoblogger was closely tied to a
videoblogging platform, fuelled by a desire to capture the personal and
create visual archives of their everyday life. However, as there is
currently no central functioning archive of early videoblogs, the
videoblogger memory is in some sense under threat, especially its
memories and archives as a community. Methodologically, this meant that
creating a representative corpus was difficult for me, and in many
instances I have had to rely on the kindness of the videobloggers to
share their personal copies with me. Changing technical standards have
also meant that even where video files could be located, they would not
necessarily play. All digital media systems might be archival in nature,
but although they act as organisers of different kinds of data, be it
personal, scientific, social or cultural, the kinds of data that help us
constitute the self through time and space, no digital system – however
well-designed – is guaranteed to last forever. As Parikka argues, the
archive might be a central concept for digital culture, but what are the
consequences when the archive is missing or broken, as it so often
is.[^08chapter7_2] In terms of this book it is critical that greater efforts are
made to store the videobloggers’ ‘archiving of the self’ through an
institutional repository for online video culture. All digital media
systems may be archiving systems or memory banks, but although they
store information for a time, they don't necessarily do it well or
reliably. We might add to that that the *collectivity* of the
videoblogging comments should also be persevered by archiving and
without media storage they are lost to history. The archiving of digital
video does present particular challenges in terms of technical storage
but also copyright issues, distribution and access.

The emergence of the videoblog as a short-form digital film is strongly
tied to the technical constraints under which it was developed. It is
also linked to a set of perceived socio-technical assumptions about how
much data could successfully be uploaded to the internet, how fast the
video would download from the internet, how much content a perceived
possible audience would want to watch and so on. It also develops, in
its early stages, as a strong sense of the need to adhere to a kind of
videoblogging standard; a set of practices that, within the
videoblogging community, were defined as *videoblogging*. As such, the
videos I explored tended to follow certain stylistic and technical
norms, developed within a core community of users, and subsequently
adopted by the wider community. The media-form aesthetic sustained
itself, with the community acting as both guide and regulator of its
standards, informing users if they were ‘doing it wrong’ but also acting
as a technical and social support system, through which expertise was
shared, experiences publically debated, and feedback given. The
community also sustained its radical edge through constant debate and
contestation, which meant that, despite its concern with a
‘videoblogging vernacular’, it never quite settled for a fixed
definition of what videoblogging was, and thus remained open to ideas
and new possibilities. This openness, what I also refer to as its
contingency, would ultimately lead to the gradual decline in the
community activities, as the members moved on to newer networks, new
technologies and different platforms.

The early communities of practice and related cultural forms that
crystallised around digital video on the internet between 2004-2009,
moved from a nascent and developing technical-cultural assemblage to a
videoblogging platform. This emerged as a specific instance of the
short-form digital film around which a community of users emerged who
through contestation and debate were able to sustain a shared
conceptualisation of video-work. The videobloggers’ sophisticated
understanding of their own practice, combined with the awareness of
wider cultural norms and aesthetic influences and specific technical
expertise, created the conditions of possibility for videoblogging as
practice. Although the central work of this book has been to present a
cultural history and ethnographic analysis of the early developments of
‘online’ video, and to begin to trace the history of videoblogging
before YouTube and the rise of social media, a key argument of this
book is that early internet video cultures are a forgotten but important
aspect of the rise of video online. As such, the book examines the
interaction between the technical conditions of possibility and the
everyday practices undertaken by videobloggers, understanding the
emerging videoblogging platform through both Langlois et al’s
platform-based research and through Couldry’s theory of media as
practice. This framework contributed to my analysis of the videobloggers
practice, together with the aim of exploring what can be called a
videoblogging aesthetic – which I also call the short-form digital
film*.* This is a cultural form that, as I have shown throughout the
book, is ‘sharable’ in Silverstone’s terms, but also is ‘shared’, or has
the potential to be so. It points towards a public culture that
increasingly uses video as part of its aesthetic repertoire, whilst also
– and also increasingly – integrating it, so this history helps inform
the vernacular of a digital everyday life. We might think about this
change in the status of video (and film), as it moves away from its
complex, difficult and technical beginnings towards a more ‘democratic’
everyday medium. This reflects a videofication of culture – particularly
in relation to the way in which personal memory is increasingly held in
video form, especially short-form versions between 6 seconds and 3
minutes. We are living in an increasingly videoed and video-centric age.

Throughout the book, I have argued for the importance of an historically
informed approach to studying digital culture. Following the nascent
writings on media archaeology, the book subscribes to the view that
‘dead-ends’ and ‘failed’ media forms are perhaps more useful and
revealing about the shape of our contemporary media landscape than the
more obvious historical narratives often assigned to events
retrospectively. The materialist influence on this book is informed by
the field of media archaeology, which itself draws on the writings of
the German Media School, and provides a key part of the theoretical
foundation to the original ethnographic research I have undertaken, and
has allowed me to frame the critical engagement I have made with the
material technologies and practices of videoblogging.

Despite being involved in what became a ‘failed’ project, the
videoblogging community developed and in some cases remediated some of
the key aesthetic and technical practices that were taken up by
subsequent online video users. For example, the visual effect created by
using the tip of your finger in the now extinct video application Vine,
for instance, is remarkably similar to the editing styles used by many
early videobloggers. Although some videoblogs may appear to confirm
claims that videoblogging merely reproduced televisual aesthetics, in
contrast, by combining an historical contextualisation with an analysis
of the videobloggers’ self-definitions of their practice with a close
visual analysis of their videos, I argue that videoblogging draws on a
much wider range of influences, and which contributed to a new and
distinctive form of video creativity. In relation to this, it has been
instructive that the informants in this study constantly demonstrated
their reflexivity in relation to their videoblogging practices and in
the multiple forms in which it was deployed.

Videoblogs are an invested network, and their cultural value is best
appreciated within the context of the videoblog and a videoblogging
community. Therefore it is time for the establishment of a videoblogging
archive aimed at cataloguing and preserving these disorganised and
dispersed objects - and it is crucial that they are archived, with
appropriate means for preservation and possible future playback. I argue
that it is important to build and maintain this archive with
consultation with the former members of the videoblogging community, in
order to acknowledge what has been established here; that the videos are
far more than simply video files. They are crystallisations of the
embodied practices, technical and aesthetic experimentations and
personal narratives of a closely knit community of interest.

It is ironic to note that, despite their investment in community, and
the fact it was sustained in part by demands of investing in/sharing
technological expertise, the videoblogging community was constantly
looking for ways to make the practice of videoblogging more widespread,
accessible and ‘easier’ in terms of technical expertise, seen for
example in the excitement and passion within the community at the
emergence of Web 2.0. This promised many solutions to technical issues
that the videoblogging community struggled with in its early days. The
ease of use, the seamless integration of video publishing and
consumption, as well as the potentials for hosting and distribution,
really resonated with the members of the community – despite their
antagonistic attitude towards YouTube.

In the end, the very technologies that were meant to assist and improve
the practice of videoblogging, and I would argue in many ways fulfilled
that, also signalled the end of the early-adopter community and the
beginning of a ‘new generation’ of online video. By removing the
technical obstacles that had fostered such intense communication and
discussions on the list, the community saw itself grow larger in actual
numbers, but arguably smaller in terms of personal communication and
sharing. Many users who had been very active in the beginning, faded
away, or moved to new social networks and video services. A sense
remained, however, that these new services lacked something that the
original videoblogging community had provided, ‘I have tried Vine a
little bit,’ Dedman told me in 2013 ‘its cool. I love how simple
videoblogging has gotten.’ With the ease of at
first YouTube, and later, video applications such as Vine, Snapchat and
Instagram, which allows professional looking video-editing at the tip of
your fingers, the need for a specialised community space in which to
discuss the technical, social and aesthetic intricacies of laboured and
time-consuming video-production, was made less compelling for
videobloggers and other interested parties. In other words, technical
communities were very much a reflection, not just of shared values and
practices, but also of a shared sense of esprit de corps towards a
difficult and challenging environment.

The videoblogging community was formed not just with a concern for
making these short-form digital films, although these remained
important, but also the technical *a priori* and the complexities and
contestations that crystallised around it, where they were able to
develop and strengthen the community and its self-identity. The
cultural-technical hybrid that I am gesturing towards here is unique in
that it demanded its members to be both culturally *and* technically
proficient as well as keen to control and manage both its cultural
production *and* the means of production themselves. However, this
remained a fragile network based around a generally non-commercial
sharing orientation drawn from open-source software and principles from
open culture, and thus remained susceptible to co-option by corporate
capital and funded alternatives like YouTube.

The videobloggers’ early digital works have been presented here as
original case studies of material digital culture on the internet.
Traces of the practices, technologies and aesthetics of videoblogging
have since been drawn on and amplified in network culture, mainstream
media, and contemporary media and cultural production. I argue that the
discourses and technological infrastructures that were developed both
within and around the community of videobloggers created important
pre-conditions for the video artifacts they produced. Early online video
did not start with the launch of YouTube, but rather the practices and
technologies were already being debated, experimented with and utilised
since the early 2000s. In 2004, videoblogging as it is conceptualised
here, started to take shape. The constellation of technologies that were
made available around this time, the stability of QuickTime in this
period played a part here, as did the rise of open-source software, the
web platform, Blogger (which was bought by Google in 2003). Blip.tv and
OurMedia were also important, and the Sanyo Xacti digital camera, which
was launched in 2005, was widely loved for its functionality and
aesthetic. We might also link the openness of media to its reusability,
particularly in terms of a lack of strong proprietary platform
control.[^08chapter7_4]

This book has sought to fill a gap in previous studies of online video
that generally haven't engaged with videoblogs and their materiality. This
book is thus somewhat distanced from previous, screenic studies of
videoblogging, which also tended to avoid issues of materiality. My
concern has been with an approach to videoblogging which analyses it
through not only the screen image but also through the embodied
practices of the videobloggers, and its medium-specific
cultural-technical practices. Treating the videoblogs as material
digital objects meant analysing their content but also their technical a
priori. In this respect it is interesting that the videoblogging
platform, or the technical systems enabling videoblogging as practice
experienced a period of relative calm in the years between 2004 and
2009, which is when the community was at its most active. The calm came
about partly because during this period Apple slowed releases of
QuickTime while concentrating on moving between microprocessor
platforms. At this time other components of the videoblogging platform
also fell into place, and for a while a constellation of compatible
technologies co-existed in digital harmony, allowing the media form to
develop. Some technical stability may in fact have been a key condition
of possibility in the emergence of the videoblogging community, allowing
it to focus on developing practices and processes, and to negotiate
technical complexity, rather than expending its energy constantly
learning about and updating video codecs. Technical effects of the
media, such as the one outlined above, intervene in interesting ways as
a cultural formation develops. Silverstone’s notion of the ‘double
articulation’ of media, which argues that ‘through its double
articulation, the medium does become the message, though that message is
not pre-given by the technology. It is worked and reworked within the
social circumstances under which it is both produced and received’ is
very apt for describing this process.[^08chapter7_5]

Throughout this book I have attempted to remain reflexive of the
videoblog as an historically located cultural practice. In relation to
questions of materiality, here I would like to return to the issue of
the importance of archives and the lack of institutional repositories in
relation to some aspects of popular culture in digital contexts. Indeed,
it is impossible to quantify just how much digital culture has already
been lost. For example, Geocities was very nearly destroyed as an
archive, and the British Library only started archiving the UK portion
of the internet in 2013. As a comparison, the Norwegian
*Nasjonalbiblioteket* started archiving the Norwegian web as early as
2006.

In this book, I have presented a cartography of the cultural/technical
structures, created and maintained by the videoblogging community and I
like to think we can see the outlines of the trajectories of future
media and cultural production. Indeed, this is demonstrated by the kinds
of networked cultural-technical hybrids I have highlighted. In this work
I have been keen to draw attention to the tendency within digital and
new media cultures to *forget*. The desire to embrace new technologies,
as seen with the increasing focus on YouTube developing in conjunction
with tools and technologies that allow for the adoption of
videoblog-like practices, sometimes means that earlier iterations are
side-lined or dismissed as irrelevant or out-dated. I argue that in
order to maintain critical understandings of the media practices and
theories we observe around us today, it is essential to remember the
media practices of the past, especially those that – even only 10 years
after – may on the surface seem out-dated, or even irrelevant. I agree
with Parikka who argues that researchers need to ‘look at media… in
terms of their long-term relations that radically steps out of the
short-term use value that is promoted in capitalist media
industries’.[^08chapter7_6]

Public discourse around the new media landscape is arguably not so
utopian today as in the 2000s (although Morozov shows that this
utopianism is still operative in some sense in the technical industries
of Silicon Valley).[^08chapter7_7] YouTube is big business now, with a class of
YouTube ‘stars’ making a living off either highly polished brands or the
reviews/commentary of games and gameplay such as Twitch.tv. Although
YouTube takes a large cut, content creators are perhaps not making as
much money as the media has reported.[^08chapter7_8] Today, it is rare to watch a
video on YouTube without first having to sit through (or skip) an ad,
and a large proportion of content consumed online is now corporate
content, television programmes, music videos or news. The millennials
may be watching more digital video than TV, but the question should be
not just what are they watching, but also how are they creating and
changing this new video age? One of the interesting aspects of writing
about early internet culture today, is to look back on the discourses of
optimism and excitement that prevailed in the early days of the
videoblogging community, with a perhaps more nuanced and critical take
on how events transpired. The early videoblogging community was excited
about video, about community and about the possibility of making media,
sharing it with the world and being part of the ‘new media’ landscape.
This excitement was reflected in the debates on the list, which could be
heated and antagonistic, but also caring and supportive. Jen Simmons, an
early videoblogger, summarised videoblogging; ‘One of the things that…
felt so fresh and weird and new 10 years ago is that, you know, I would
watch that video, it’s, whatever, 5 minutes. I spent 5 minutes of my
life watching something that didn’t matter… That was not a hit NBC
television show in a primetime slot on Thursday night. It was not
designed to get 40 million people to watch it. It was, like, you were
going to show it to your 4 friends. Today, in 2014, it’s like, ‘So what?
Duh.’ But back then, that felt so radical and weird… It did mean
something. It was a kind of conversation on a small level that was
intimate, that mattered.’[^08chapter7_9] Instead of being a one-way communication
from creator to consumer, videoblogging was arguably about creating
conversations among members of a community.[^08chapter7_10]  This gestures towards
something new and interesting about digital culture.[^08chapter7_11]

Companies such as Google and Facebook are hoovering up content, scraping
data and storing infinite amount of information about all of us on their
servers. As the events surrounding Edward Snowden have made painfully
clear, even our own governments are monitoring and collecting data on an
unprecedented scale. This, it goes without saying, includes video and
audio – which has created a new terrain for thinking about the growth of
vernacular video and its growing penetration of everyday life,
facilitated by the distribution through social media platforms like
Facebook and Twitter. I leave the implications of this new and dangerous
potential for monitoring and surveillance to others as it lies outside
the scope of my book. Nonetheless, I think I have demonstrated the
importance of understanding new forms of digital video practices in both
private and public contexts. It also points toward new ways of reading
and writing culture, and the dissemination of ideas and arguments in
*public* through new forms of digital media.[^08chapter7_12]

The complexity of studying new cultural practices entangled with new
media technologies requires a new constellation of methods and
approaches. This book has redoubled my feeling that it is crucial that
at important junctures in digital culture we take the time to study even
the most ephemeral of cultural practices, and also to seek to archive
them in a responsible way that enables future historians and cultural
theorists to use them. There is little doubt that as media merge in new
forms through the pressure of digitalisation and the growth in the power
and versatility of digital technology, rethinking method will be an
on-going process. As Burgess and Green argue, rather than explaining
amateur video as ‘video about nothing’ or celebrity without talent, it
might be more helpful to situate the practice in the much longer history
of ‘vernacular creativity – the wide range of everyday practices (from
scrapbooking to family photography to the storytelling that forms part
of a casual chat) practiced outside the cultural value system of either
high culture or commercial creative practice’.[^08chapter7_13] The practices
associated with videoblogging, serve as an important example of how
amateur and semi-professional video artists were working, creating and
distributing video across the internet in the mid-2000s. Unfortunately,
most of these videoblogging archives are currently residing ‘offline’ on
individual hard drives and in a variety of unstable video hosting sites.
They hold narratives and memories of friends, family, lived experiences,
and of a community that helped introduce a large number of people to
posting video on the internet. As such, it is strange that videoblogging
has remained little explored in relation to internet history. But as a
cultural form, some aspects of videoblogging lives on, in some sense
remediated through a constellation of new technologies and adapted
practices, from YouTube to Instagram, Snapchat and Facebook, perhaps as
a form of reconstituted dead or zombie media.[^08chapter7_14]

Videoblogging is a cultural practice that, although somewhat changed in
relation to the form that was prevalent in 2004-2007, is now
expanding, as mobile phones and other technical devices incorporate new
video cameras, software and technologies that enable the sharing and
storing of moving image materials. Many of the commonplace practices we
see on YouTube, Instagram, Snapchat and other video sites were first
developed for a digital environment by the early community of
videobloggers. As such, the rich cultural history of videoblogging
explored here has tried to do justice to the contradictions and
complexities of a living, evolving and above all creative community of
technologists, artists, video-makers and designers in light of these
later developments.

I believe the videoblogging community raises important questions about
the trajectories and failures of what was once called ‘new media’. The
videoblog has silently contributed toward the growing penetration of
digital video as a vernacular medium, but also a medium that
increasingly documents the present in a form that captures a ‘rough
draft of history’. This is a partial history to be sure, but one that is
mediated by new techniques of storing the moving image, and new and
remediated narrative structures and aesthetics. In many ways videoblogs
are an answer to the call for a democratized form of vernacular media
but crucially they also suture the film of yesterday with the film of
tomorrow. This is a reticular medium that can be sharable and shared,
private and public, individual and collective. In some senses, then,
videoblogging is not so much the film of tomorrow, envisaged by Francois
Truffaut in 1957, but rather the film of today.

[^08chapter7_1]: Verdi, *Vlog Anarchy*, transcript.

[^08chapter7_2]: Parikka, *What is Media Archaeology?* p. 160.

[^08chapter7_4]: Parikka, What is Media Archaeology?, p. 149.

[^08chapter7_5]: Silverstone, *Television and Everyday Life*, p. 83.

[^08chapter7_6]: Parikka, *What is Media Archaeology?,* p. 147.

[^08chapter7_7]: Morozov, ‘The Meme Hustler’.

[^08chapter7_8]: J. Edwards, ‘Yes, You Can Make Six Figures As A YouTube Star...
    And Still End Up Poor’, 2014, http://www.businessinsider.com/how-
    much-money-youtube-stars-actually-make-2014-2.

[^08chapter7_9]: The Web Ahead, ‘Videoblogging with Jay Dedman, Ryanne Hodson and
    Michael Verdi.’

[^08chapter7_10]: Hodson and Verdi, *Secrets of Videoblogging*, p. 189.

[^08chapter7_11]: See for instance Christian Fuchs, ‘Against Henry Jenkins. Remarks
    on Henry Jenkins’ ICA Talk “Spreadable Media”’ 30 May 2011,
    http://fuchs.uti.at/570/.

[^08chapter7_12]: The issue of public culture and the way in which videoblogging
    and practices of video reading and writing can contribute to it lie
    beyond the scope of this book, but remain suggestive of new means
    for politics to reconnect with younger citizens who increasingly
    connect to public life through *video* in the first instance through
    platforms like YouTube, Facebook, Vine and Vimeo.

[^08chapter7_13]: Burgess and Green, *YouTube*, p. 25.

[^08chapter7_14]: Hertz and Parikka, ‘Zombie Media: Circuit Bending Media
    Archaeology into an Art Method.’
